.\" Manual page for tacctl, the tacquito management CLI.
.\" Render locally with: groff -man -Tascii man/tacctl.1 | less
.TH TACCTL 1 "2026-04-18" "tacctl" "Tacquito Control Manual"
.SH NAME
tacctl \- management CLI for the tacquito TACACS+ server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tacctl
.I command
.RI [ subcommand ]
.RI [ arguments... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B tacctl
is a shell-based management CLI for
.BR tacquito ,
a TACACS+ server (RFC 8907).
It installs and upgrades the server, manages users, groups, and scopes
(named CIDR + shared-secret bundles), edits server configuration,
inspects logs and backups, and generates ready-to-paste device
configuration for Cisco IOS/IOS-XE and Juniper Junos.
.PP
Most commands require root.
.B tacctl
re-executes itself under
.BR sudo (8)
automatically when invoked by a non-root user.
.B tacctl hash
and
.B tacctl version
are deliberate exceptions: they run as the invoking user.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS System lifecycle
.TP
.BI "install [--branch " name "]"
Install the tacquito server and supporting configuration. Installs the
Go toolchain, builds the tacquito binary, creates the
.B tacquito
service user, seeds
.IR /etc/tacquito/tacquito.yaml ,
installs the systemd unit, and enables the service. The optional
.BI --branch " name"
flag selects a specific tacctl repository branch for the install.
.IP
Four built-in users are seeded so fresh installs ship with usable
identities (without writing unknown credentials) and with a sink for
Junos internal accounting:
.B engineer
.RB ( superuser ),
.B operator
.RB ( operator ),
.B viewer
.RB ( readonly ),
and
.B root
.RB ( readonly ).
.IP
The first three carry a placeholder hash that never authenticates;
activate one with
.B "tacctl user passwd " <name>
(setting a real password implicitly enables the account).
.B root
is different — a permanent accounting-only sink whose hash stays
disabled for the lifetime of the install. It exists because Junos
internal daemons (mgd, jsd, op-script probes) run non-tty CLI commands
as root and generate accounting packets; without a
.B root
entry tacquito logs an error for every packet.
.B "tacctl user passwd root"
is rejected — root is a Junos built-in intended for local/console use
only and must never authenticate via TACACS+.
.TP
.BI "upgrade [--branch " name "]"
Pull the latest tacquito source and management scripts, rebuild the
binary if changed, refresh system files, and restart the service.
User-set flags for
.BR -network ,
.BR -address ,
and
.B -level
are preserved via a systemd drop-in so they survive template updates.
.TP
.B uninstall
Remove the tacquito service, binaries, configuration, logs, and
management repository. Offers to preserve backups and accounting logs
by archiving them to
.IR /root/ .
.TP
.B status
Show service health, authentication statistics, recent errors, and
password-age warnings.
.TP
.BR "version" ", " "--version" ", " "-v"
Print the tacctl version. The version is derived from
.BR git-describe (1)
against the installed repository, so it reflects the exact commit
currently deployed.
.SS User management \fB(tacctl user)\fR
.TP
.B user list
List all users with name, group, status, and password age.
.TP
.BI "user show " name
Show detailed user info: group, status, password change date and age,
last login (from the accounting log), Cisco privilege level, Juniper
class, and a hash fingerprint. Read-only -- does not prompt for the
password (unlike
.BR "user verify" ).
.TP
.BI "user add " "name group " [ "--hash " hash ] [ "--scopes " name[,name...] ]
Add a user. Prompts for the password with confirmation. If
.BI --hash " hash"
is given, the bcrypt hash is used directly and no password is prompted
(use this when users self-generate a hash; see
.BR "tacctl hash commands" ).
.BI --scopes " name"[,name...]
grants the user access to those scopes (see
.B SCOPE MANAGEMENT ).
Without
.BR --scopes ,
the user lands in the current default scope. On fresh installs the
default scope is
.B lab
— least-privilege posture, so an operator who forgets
.B --scopes
does not accidentally grant production access.
.PP
Reserved usernames
.RB ( root
and
.BR tacquito )
are rejected: both map to local OS accounts that tacquito resolves outside
the YAML. Create an operator-specific account instead (for example,
.BR "tacctl user add jsmith superuser" ).
.TP
.BI "user remove " name
Remove a user after confirmation.
.TP
.BI "user passwd " "name " [ "--hash " hash ]
Change a user's password. Prompts for the new password with
confirmation. If
.BI --hash " hash"
is given, the bcrypt hash is used directly and no password is prompted
(mirrors
.B user add --hash
for users who self-generate via
.BR "tacctl hash commands" ).
.TP
.BI "user disable " name
Disable a user while preserving the password hash for later re-enable.
.TP
.BI "user enable " name
Re-enable a previously disabled user.
.TP
.BI "user rename " "old new"
Rename a user.
.TP
.BI "user move " "name group"
Move a user to a different group without changing the password.
.TP
.BI "user verify " name
Show user details and verify the password interactively.
.TP
.B "user scope " \fIname\fR " " [ "list " | " add " \fIs\fR[,s...] | " remove " \fIs\fR[,s...] | " set " \fIs\fR[,s...] | " clear " ]
Manage which scopes
.I name
can authenticate from. With no subcommand (or
.BR list ),
prints the user's current scopes with orphan detection (any scope
name that does not resolve to a
.B secrets[].name
is flagged red).
.B add
and
.B remove
accept one or a comma-separated list of existing scope names;
.B set
replaces the whole list;
.B clear
empties it (with confirmation).
.B clear
preserves the bcrypt hash — distinct from
.B user disable
in that intent is "temporarily revoke scope access" rather than
"revoke the password".
.SS Group management \fB(tacctl group)\fR
.TP
.B group list
List all groups with Cisco privilege level, Juniper class, and user count.
.TP
.BI "group add " "name priv-lvl juniper-class"
Add a custom group.
.I priv-lvl
is an integer 0\(en15;
.I juniper-class
matches the Junos login class name.
.TP
.B "group edit " \fIname\fR " { priv-lvl \fIN\fR | juniper-class \fICLASS\fR }"
Change a group's Cisco privilege level or Juniper class. The built-in
groups
.RB ( readonly ,
.BR operator ,
.BR superuser )
can be edited but not removed.
.TP
.BI "group remove " name
Remove a custom group. Built-in groups are protected.
.TP
.B "group commands list " \fIgroup\fR
Show the per-command authorization rules for a group, including the
default action (the action of the trailing
.RB ` * `
catchall rule).
.TP
.B "group commands default " \fIgroup\fR " { permit | deny }"
Set the default action for unmatched commands. Stored as the action
of a trailing
.RB ` * `
rule that tacquito's
.B CommandBasedAuthorizer
matches as a wildcard.
.TP
.B "group commands add " \fIgroup\fR " " \fIname\fR " [ --match \fIregex\fR ]... [ --action permit | deny ]"
Append a rule. Default action is
.BR permit .
The
.I name
is matched against the TACACS+
.B cmd=
field literally. Each
.B --match
adds an arg-list regex (auto-anchored with
.RB ` ^…$ `).
The first matching rule wins; tacquito returns FAIL if no rule
matches and the
.RB ` * `
catchall is not
.BR permit .
.TP
.B "group commands remove " \fIgroup\fR " " \fIname\fR
Drop a rule by name. The
.RB ` * `
catchall is protected; change it via
.B group commands default
or remove the entire block via
.B group commands clear .
.TP
.BI "group commands clear " group
Remove a group's command-rule override from
.IR tacctl.yaml .
The merged view falls back to the shipped defaults for built-in groups
.RB ( readonly ,
.BR operator ,
.BR superuser );
for custom groups the group ends up with no rules at all. Tacquito.yaml
is regenerated afterwards so device-side enforcement stays in sync.
Confirmation required.
.TP
.B "group commands seed " [ \fIgroup\fR ] " " [ --force ]
Recovery tool. Writes the legacy broader rule set (with
.BR enable ,
.BR clear ,
.BR test ,
.BR monitor ,
etc.) as overrides in
.IR tacctl.yaml .
On fresh installs the smaller shipped defaults (viewable via
.BR "tacctl config defaults" )
are already in effect; you only need
.B seed
if you've customized and want to start from a known, broader baseline.
Without an argument, seeds all three built-ins; with a group name, only
that one (custom groups are not seeded). Refuses to overwrite existing
rules without
.BR --force .
Legacy seed defaults:
.B readonly
permits
.IR "show ping traceroute terminal exit end quit logout who where enable"
with default deny;
.B operator
adds
.IR "clear test monitor"
to the readonly set with default deny;
.B superuser
gets a
.RB ` "* permit" `
catchall.
.TP
.BI "group privilege list " group
Show the Cisco
.B "privilege exec level"
mappings for a group. Reports whether the source is an explicit
override (in
.I /etc/tacquito/tacctl.yaml
under
.BR privileges.\fIgroup\fR )
or the built-in default set (move-DOWN commands only).
.TP
.B "group privilege add " \fIgroup\fR " '\fIcmd\fR'[,'\fIcmd\fR'...]"
Move one or more Cisco commands to the group's priv-lvl. Quote
multi-word commands (e.g.
.RB ' "show running-config" ' );
separate multiple commands with commas. On first
.B add
the group's defaults are inherited; subsequent adds extend that set.
Every command is validated before anything is written — a bad command
aborts the whole op.
.TP
.B "group privilege remove " \fIgroup\fR " '\fIcmd\fR'[,'\fIcmd\fR'...]"
Drop one or more previously-mapped commands. Accepts the same
comma-separated list form as
.BR add .
If only defaults are in effect, the remove takes effect against the
default set (suppressing those commands for that group).
.TP
.BI "group privilege clear " group
Wipe explicit mappings for a group; the built-in default set takes
over again.
.TP
.B "group privilege seed " [ \fIgroup\fR ] " " [ --force ]
Populate the built-in groups with their default mapping set. Same
shape as
.BR "group commands seed" .
Default sets:
.B readonly
none (priv-1 is the floor);
.B operator
ships a priv-15 read/diagnostic family moved DOWN to priv-7
.RI ( "show running-config" ,
.IR "show startup-config" ,
.IR "show tech-support" ,
.IR "show archive" ,
.IR "show access-list" ,
.IR "show ip route" );
.B superuser
none (priv-15 is the ceiling).
.PP
Cisco devices enforce these rules LIVE — once any group has rules,
.B tacctl config cisco
emits
.B aaa authorization commands 1/7/15 default group TACACS-GROUP local
and IOS asks tacquito for every command. Juniper enforces locally via
class
.B allow-commands
/
.B deny-commands
regex; a per-device config push is required after every change.
.SS Server configuration \fB(tacctl config)\fR
.TP
.B config show
Show the current configuration summary.
.TP
.B config dump
Print the tacctl tunable posture: canonical defaults
.RB ( conf_emit_defaults
in
.IR bin/tacctl.sh ),
operator overrides
.RI ( tacctl.yaml ),
and the effective merged view.
.TP
.B config defaults
Print the canonical defaults YAML only (no overrides, no merge).
Useful for seeding a new
.I tacctl.yaml
or piping into
.B diff
against an existing one.
.TP
.BI "config get " "path" " [fallback]"
Read one dotted-path value (e.g.
.BR bcrypt.cost )
from the merged view. Emits empty + the fallback if the path is missing.
Lists and maps produce no output; use
.B "config get-list"
or
.B "config dump"
instead.
.TP
.BI "config get-list " "path"
Read a list value (e.g.
.BR mgmt_acl.permits )
from the merged view, one element per stdout line.
.TP
.B config validate
Validate YAML syntax for
.I tacquito.yaml
and
.IR tacctl.yaml ,
schema-walk every override key in
.I tacctl.yaml
against the write-time validator (catches hand-edits that bypass the
setter commands — including malformed
.BR commands.\fIgroup\fR
rules,
.BR privileges.\fIgroup\fR
lists, out-of-range integers, unknown keys), then check the server config
for structural issues: missing sections, orphan scope refs, default-scope
marker pointing at a nonexistent scope, per-scope key divergence,
reserved usernames
.RB ( root ,
.BR tacquito )
present as tacctl-managed users, users missing the
.B accounter:
field, and per-scope key divergence.
.TP
.BI "config diff " [ timestamp ]
Diff the current config against a backup. Defaults to the most recent
backup.
.TP
.BI "config loglevel " [ debug | info | error ]
Show or change the server log level. Written to a systemd drop-in so
the change survives upgrades.
.TP
.B "config listen " "{ show | tcp | tcp6 | reset } " [ address ]
Show, change, or reset the TCP listen address. Stored in the drop-in
at
.IR /etc/systemd/system/tacquito.service.d/tacctl-overrides.conf .
.B reset
clears the override and falls back to the template default.
.B
Switching to tcp6
prompts for confirmation because dual-stack sockets accept IPv4
clients via mapped addresses
.RB ( ::ffff:x.x.x.x )
that silently bypass IPv4 prefix ACLs; see
.B NOTES.
.TP
.B "config metrics " "{ show | enable | disable | address " \fIhost:port\fR " | reset }"
Control the prometheus HTTP exporter's listen address.
.B show
(no arg) prints current state and address.
.B enable
clears the override and reverts to the unit default
.RB ( 127.0.0.1:8080 ,
loopback-only).
.B disable
sinks the exporter to
.B 127.0.0.1:0
— an ephemeral loopback port that no scraper can discover, so the
exporter is effectively off even though its goroutine still runs. This
indirection is deliberate: tacquito's upstream
.B -export-promhttp=false
path unconditionally cancels the server context, which would tear the
whole daemon down, so tacctl avoids the flag and uses an unreachable
bind instead.
.B "address " \fIhost:port\fR
binds explicitly (e.g.
.B 10.1.0.1:8080
to expose to external scrapers); non-loopback binds print a warning.
.B reset
clears the override and falls back to the unit default.
.TP
.B "config sudoers " "{ show | install | remove } " [ group ]
Manage the optional
.I /etc/sudoers.d/tacctl
drop-in that grants NOPASSWD sudo on
.B tacctl
to a group (default:
.BR adm ).
Installs are validated with
.BR visudo (8)
before taking effect. Not installed by default.
.TP
.BI "config password-age " [ days ]
Show or set the password age warning threshold. Default 90 days.
.TP
.BI "config bcrypt-cost " [ "10-14" ]
Show or set the bcrypt cost factor used when hashing new or changed
passwords. Default 12. Existing hashes keep their minted cost.
.TP
.BI "config password-min-length " [ "8-64" ]
Show or set the minimum length enforced by
.B validate_password_strength
on interactively-entered passwords. Default 12 (OWASP 2025). Floor 8
(NIST 800-63). Auto-generated passwords (operator accepts the blank
prompt) bypass this check.
.TP
.BI "config secret-min-length " [ "16-128" ]
Show or set the minimum length enforced when an operator types a
custom shared secret via
.BR "scope secret " \fIname\fR " set" .
Default 16 (Cisco TACACS+ best practice). Auto-generated secrets
bypass this check.
.TP
.B "config allow " "{ list | add | remove | clear } " [ cidr[,cidr...] ]
Manage the connection allow list (IP ACL).
.B add
and
.B remove
accept a single CIDR or a comma-separated list.
.B clear
wipes the entire list (with confirmation) — the result fails open so
any source IP becomes eligible to connect, subject to the deny list
and the secret-provider prefixes.
.TP
.B "config deny " "{ list | add | remove | clear } " [ cidr[,cidr...] ]
Manage the connection deny list. Same comma-list and
.B clear
semantics as
.BR "config allow" .
.B deny
takes precedence over
.BR allow ;
with both empty, all connections are accepted.
.TP
.B "config mgmt-acl " "{ list | add | remove | clear | cisco-name | juniper-name } " [ arg ]
Manage a shared CIDR permit list stored under
.B mgmt_acl.permits
in
.I /etc/tacquito/tacctl.yaml
that drives both the Cisco VTY-ACL and a commented Juniper lo0
firewall-filter example emitted by
.B config cisco
and
.BR "config juniper" .
Preserved across
.BR "tacctl upgrade" .
.B list
/
.B add
/
.B remove
/
.B clear
manage the permit list;
.B add
and
.B remove
accept a single CIDR or a comma-separated list.
.B cisco-name
and
.B juniper-name
configure the emitted ACL/filter names (see below). With no arguments,
prints usage, the current entry count, and both ACL names.
.TP
.BI "config mgmt-acl cisco-name " [ name ]
Show or set the name of the IOS access-list emitted by
.BR "config cisco" .
Default
.BR VTY-ACL .
Names must start with a letter and contain only letters, digits,
.RB ` _ ` ,
or
.RB ` - `
(max 63 chars).
.TP
.BI "config mgmt-acl juniper-name " [ name ]
Show or set the name of the Junos firewall filter emitted by
.BR "config juniper" .
Default
.BR MGMT-SSH-ACL .
Same character rules as
.BR cisco-name .
Both overrides live under
.B mgmt_acl.names.{cisco,juniper}
in
.I /etc/tacquito/tacctl.yaml
and survive
.BR "tacctl upgrade" .
.TP
.BI "config cisco " [ "--scope " name ]
Print a ready-to-paste Cisco IOS/IOS-XE configuration with the
server IP, shared secret, current group-to-privilege mappings, and
the VTY-ACL built from
.B config mgmt-acl
pre-filled. Without
.BR --scope ,
emits the default scope's secret (header names the scope and lists
sibling scopes as a hint).
.TP
.BI "config juniper " [ "--scope " name ]
Print a ready-to-paste Juniper Junos configuration with template
users, TACACS+ server setup, verification commands, and a commented
lo0 firewall-filter example built from
.B config mgmt-acl
pre-filled. Scope handling matches
.BR "config cisco" .
.TP
.BI "config branch " [ name ]
Show or change the tacctl repository branch used by
.B tacctl upgrade.
.SS Log inspection \fB(tacctl log)\fR
.TP
.BI "log tail " [ n ]
Show the last
.I n
journal entries for the tacquito service (default 20).
.TP
.BI "log search " term
Search logs for a username or keyword over the last 7 days.
.TP
.B log failures
Show authentication failures from the last 24 hours.
.TP
.BI "log accounting " [ n ]
Show the last
.I n
entries from
.IR /var/log/tacquito/accounting.log .
.TP
.B "log clear " [ --force ]
Purge tacquito journal entries
.RB ( "journalctl --rotate && journalctl --vacuum-time=1s -u tacquito" )
and truncate
.IR /var/log/tacquito/accounting.log .
Prompts for confirmation;
.B --force
(or
.BR -y )
skips the prompt for scripted use. Destructive — historical auth and
accounting records are irrecoverable once cleared.
.SS Backup management \fB(tacctl backup)\fR
.TP
.B backup list
List available config backups with timestamps.
.TP
.BI "backup diff " [ timestamp ]
Diff the current config against a backup (default: most recent).
.TP
.BI "backup restore " timestamp
Restore a config backup after confirmation.
.PP
Backups are created automatically before every change. The last 30 are
retained under
.IR /etc/tacquito/backups/ .
.SS Hash generation \fB(tacctl hash)\fR
.TP
.B hash
With no subcommand (or with
.BR help ),
prints a usage summary listing
.B generate
and
.BR commands .
Does not require root.
.TP
.B hash generate
Interactively prompt for a password on the server and print its bcrypt
hash. Needs
.B python3-bcrypt
installed. Intended for admins who can shell in to the tacquito host.
.TP
.B hash commands
Print client-side bcrypt-generation recipes for operators who cannot
SSH to the server. Covers Linux/macOS (Python + htpasswd), Windows
(Python + PowerShell/BCrypt.Net), and any-OS Node.js. Each recipe
prints both the raw
.B $2b$\&...
and hex-encoded forms;
.B "user add --hash"
/
.B "user passwd --hash"
accept either and normalize to hex on write.
.SH SCOPE MANAGEMENT
A
.I scope
is a named bundle of (client CIDR prefixes, TACACS+ shared secret).
It corresponds to one entry in the tacquito YAML
.B secrets:
list, and each user's
.B scopes:
field references one or more of these by name. tacquito selects a
provider by first-CIDR-match; authentication succeeds only when the
matched scope is in the user's
.B scopes:
list.
.PP
Fresh installs seed a single scope named
.B lab
(least-privilege default). Operators add additional scopes (for
example
.BR prod ,
.BR edge ,
.BR dmz )
as needed, and place users into them explicitly.
.SS Top-level \fB(tacctl scope)\fR
.TP
.B scopes list
Print every
.B secrets[]
entry in tacquito's first-match order (one row per scope-prefix pair,
numbered by slice position). Multi-prefix scopes repeat their name on
each prefix row so the display literally mirrors routing priority —
reading top to bottom shows the order tacquito tries providers for a
connecting client. Use
.BR "scope show " \fIname\fR
for the aggregated per-scope view (users, secret, default marker).
.TP
.BI "scope show " name
Full detail for one scope: prefixes, users that reference it, raw
shared-secret value with length/posture, and whether the scope is
the default.
.TP
.B "scope add " \fIname\fR " --prefixes " \fIcidr\fR[,cidr...] " [ --secret \fIvalue\fR | --secret generate ] [ --default ]
Create a new scope. Prefixes are required; each must not already
belong to another scope (overlap with a broader scope's supernet is
fine — the new scope's narrower prefix will win first-match).
.B --secret generate
produces a strong key automatically.
.B --default
makes the new scope the default for
.BR "user add" .
.TP
.BI "scope remove " "name " [ --force ]
Remove a scope. Drops every
.B secrets[]
entry whose name matches (flat emission spreads one logical scope across
one entry per prefix). Refuses by default if any user references the
scope; with
.BR --force ,
strips the name from all affected users AND removes the secrets
entries, with a loud warning.
.TP
.BI "scope rename " "old new"
Rename a scope. Rewrites
.B name:
on every matching
.B secrets[]
entry, every user's
.B scopes:
reference, and
.B scope.default
in
.I tacctl.yaml
(if it pointed at
.IR old ).
.TP
.BI "scope default " [ name ]
Show (no arg) or set (with arg) the default scope. Stored under
.B scope.default
in
.IR /etc/tacquito/tacctl.yaml .
Used by
.BR "user add"
when
.B --scopes
is omitted, and by
.BR "config cisco" " / " "config juniper"
when
.B --scope
is omitted.
.TP
.BI "scope lookup " ip\fR|\fIcidr
Resolve an IPv4 / IPv6 address or CIDR to the scope that owns it,
following the same slice-order walk tacquito's provider selector uses.
Prints the matching prefix and, if multiple scopes' prefixes cover the
query (e.g. a supernet/subnet overlap), lists the shadowed scopes
below the winner for debugging.
.SS Per-scope prefixes \fB(tacctl scope prefixes)\fR
.TP
.BI "scope prefixes " "scope " "list"
Show the scope's current prefixes.
.TP
.B "scope prefixes " \fIscope\fR " add " \fIcidr\fR[,cidr...]
Add one or more CIDRs. Each CIDR is canonicalized
.RB ( 10.1.5.5/24 " -> " 10.1.5.0/24 ),
checked against the one-CIDR-per-scope invariant (rejected with the
owning-scope name if already claimed elsewhere), and appended as its
own
.B secrets[]
entry. After the write, tacctl re-sorts every entry globally by prefix
specificity so tacquito's slice-ordered first-match walk routes each
client to the narrowest scope that contains it.
.TP
.B "scope prefixes " \fIscope\fR " remove " \fIcidr\fR[,cidr...]
Remove one or more CIDRs. Drops the matching
.B secrets[]
entries and re-applies the global specificity sort.
.TP
.BI "scope prefixes " "scope " "clear " [ --force ]
Empty the entire prefix list for the scope (with confirmation). Under
flat emission this removes every
.B secrets[]
entry whose name matches, so the scope vanishes from tacquito.yaml and
any user still referencing it becomes an orphan — the command refuses
to proceed when users reference the scope unless
.B --force
is given. With
.BR --force ,
orphan references are left in place for
.B config validate
to surface.
.SS Per-scope secret \fB(tacctl scope secret)\fR
.TP
.BI "scope secret " "scope " "show"
Print the scope's raw shared-secret value plus its length and posture.
The command runs as root, the YAML is mode 0640, and operators need
the raw value to paste into device configs — so
.B show
prints it rather than hiding it.
.TP
.BI "scope secret " "scope " "set " value
Set the scope's key after validation (≥
.B config secret-min-length
chars, mixed character classes).
.TP
.BI "scope secret " "scope " "generate"
Generate a strong key with
.B openssl rand -base64 24
and apply it.
.SH CONVENTIONS
The following patterns apply uniformly across subcommand families.
.TP
.B No arguments
Dispatcher commands
.RB ( user ,
.BR group ,
.BR config ,
.BR log ,
.BR backup ,
.BR hash ,
and every nested dispatcher such as
.BR "scope prefixes" ,
.BR "scope secret" ,
.BR "user scopes" ,
or
.BR "group privilege" )
print their own usage and return without side effects.
Scalar getter/setters
.RB ( "config loglevel" ,
.BR "config listen" ,
.BR "config metrics" ,
.BR "config password-age" ,
.BR "config bcrypt-cost" ,
.BR "config password-min-length" ,
.BR "config secret-min-length" ,
.BR "config branch" ,
.BR "scope default" )
print the current value when called with no arguments.
.TP
.B Multi-item input
Every
.B add
/
.B remove
subcommand that takes a CIDR or a Cisco exec command accepts either a
single value or a comma-separated list
.RI ( "cidr1,cidr2,..." ).
Every input is validated first; a bad entry aborts the entire
operation without writing anything.
.TP
.B CIDR semantics
Every CIDR-list subcommand
.RB ( "scopes prefixes" ,
.BR "config allow" ,
.BR "config deny" ,
.BR "config mgmt-acl" )
canonicalizes input before storage:
.B 10.1.5.5/24
becomes
.BR 10.1.5.0/24 ;
.B 2001:DB8::/32
becomes
.BR 2001:db8::/32 .
Exact duplicates (after canonicalization) are rejected as no-ops on
.BR add .
Overlapping CIDRs of different prefix lengths coexist
.RI ( "10.0.0.0/8 and 10.99.0.0/16 can both be present" ).
Stored order is by broadcast-address ascending (IPv4 before IPv6):
disjoint ranges sort by their end address, and an overlapping subnet
falls immediately above its containing supernet (the subnet's range
ends before the supernet's). This groups related CIDRs together and
gives tacquito's provider selector the "most-specific first among
overlaps" ordering it needs so that a narrower scope wins a first-
match lookup over a broader scope that contains it.
.TP
.B Scope prefix invariants
Every CIDR (after canonicalization) belongs to
.B exactly one
scope. Adding a prefix already owned by a different scope is rejected
with a message naming the owning scope; the operator must remove it
from the owning scope first with
.B "scope prefixes " \fIowner\fR " remove " \fIcidr\fR
before re-adding it elsewhere. Overlapping prefixes
.I across
scopes are allowed and routed correctly — a scope with
.B 10.5.0.0/16
coexists with a scope holding the supernet
.BR 10.0.0.0/8 .
.PP
To make first-match-wins honor cross-scope specificity, tacctl emits
one
.B secrets:
entry per (scope, prefix) pair — a scope with N prefixes becomes N
entries that share
.BR name: " and " secret.key: .
Entries are re-sorted globally by prefix specificity
(v4 before v6; smaller broadcast first) after every mutation, so
tacquito's slice-ordered provider walk routes each client IP to the
narrowest scope that contains it. The CLI continues to present the
logical one-scope-per-bundle view via
.BR "scope list" ", " "scopes show" ", and " "config show" .
.PP
Do not hand-edit the
.B secrets:
block under multi-prefix scopes — the same-name entries must carry
identical
.B secret.key
values.
.B config validate
reports any divergence.
.TP
.B "clear"
.B clear
subcommands always prompt with
.B [y/N]
and print a warning about the resulting posture (for example, "no
clients can connect" or "fails open").
.TP
.B Service restart
Changes that mutate
.I /etc/tacquito/tacquito.yaml
(read by tacquito) restart the tacquito service automatically.
Changes to
.I /etc/tacquito/tacctl.yaml
(tacctl-internal tunables: mgmt-ACL permits + names, bcrypt cost,
password age, per-group priv-exec mappings, etc.) do not \(em tacquito
itself never reads that file.
.TP
.B Flags
Long-form flags
.RI ( --hash ,
.IR --scopes ,
.IR --scope ,
.IR --prefixes ,
.IR --secret ,
.IR --default ,
.IR --match ,
.IR --action ,
.IR --force ,
.IR --branch )
take a single argument (except
.IR --default ,
which is a boolean). Required positional arguments come before flags.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/tacquito/tacquito.yaml
TACACS+ server configuration. Mode 0640, owned by
.BR tacquito : tacquito .
.TP
.I /etc/tacquito/backups/
Automatic configuration backups. Last 30 retained.
.TP
.I /etc/tacquito/tacctl.yaml
Operator overrides for tacctl tunables (bcrypt cost, password / secret
minimum lengths, password age warning, default scope, mgmt-ACL permits +
names, per-group Cisco priv-exec mappings). Canonical defaults are
embedded in
.I bin/tacctl.sh
and emitted on demand by
.BR "tacctl config defaults" .
Only set keys you want to change \(em missing keys inherit from the
defaults, and setting a key back to the default value removes it. An
empty overrides file is deleted. Every write is schema-validated
(out-of-range numbers, bad ACL names, malformed CIDRs, typo'd keys are
rejected before anything is written). Inspect the merged view with
.BR "tacctl config dump" ;
re-check the file with
.BR "tacctl config validate" .
.TP
.I /etc/tacquito/templates/
Host-specific overrides for the Cisco and Juniper device config
templates.
.TP
.I /etc/systemd/system/tacquito.service
Systemd unit file.
.TP
.I /etc/systemd/system/tacquito.service.d/tacctl-overrides.conf
Systemd drop-in where
.BR "tacctl config listen" ,
.BR "tacctl config loglevel" ,
and
.B "tacctl config metrics"
write their overrides. Preserved across upgrades.
.TP
.I /etc/sudoers.d/tacctl
Optional NOPASSWD sudoers rule. Installed only via
.BR "tacctl config sudoers install" .
.TP
.I /var/log/tacquito/accounting.log
Per-session accounting records. Rotated daily, retained 90 days.
.TP
.I /usr/local/bin/tacquito
The tacquito server binary.
.TP
.I /usr/local/bin/tacctl
Symlink to
.IR /opt/tacctl/bin/tacctl.sh .
.TP
.I /usr/local/bin/tacquito-hashgen
Standalone bcrypt hash generator shipped with tacquito.
.TP
.I /opt/tacctl/
Clone of the management (tacctl) repository. Source of the symlinked
CLI and the source directory consulted by
.BR "tacctl upgrade" .
.TP
.I /opt/tacquito-src/
Clone of the tacquito server source code, used to rebuild the binary
during
.BR "tacctl upgrade" .
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Install on a fresh host:
.B tacctl install
.TP
Add a superuser:
.B tacctl user add alice superuser
.TP
Restrict device subnets in the default scope:
.B tacctl scope prefixes lab add 10.1.0.0/24,172.16.5.0/24
.TP
Build a multi-environment scope hierarchy (broader prod scopes with
narrower lab scopes carved out — the /24 wins first-match for 10.10.99.x
clients, the /16 catches the rest of 10.10.x):
.nf
.B "  tacctl scope add prod_dc_east --prefixes 10.10.0.0/16 --secret generate"
.B "  tacctl scope add lab_east     --prefixes 10.10.99.0/24 --secret generate"
.fi
.TP
Trace how tacquito would route a client IP through the scope list:
.B tacctl scope lookup 10.10.99.7
.TP
Grant a user full production access across two datacenters:
.B tacctl user scope alice add prod_dc_east,prod_dc_west
.TP
Generate a Cisco-ready configuration for the prod scope:
.B tacctl config cisco --scope prod_dc_east
.TP
Bind the listener to a specific management IP:
.B tacctl config listen tcp 10.1.0.1:49
.TP
Expose the Prometheus exporter to an external scraper (default is loopback-only):
.B tacctl config metrics address 10.1.0.1:8080
.TP
Enable passwordless invocation for members of the adm group:
.B tacctl config sudoers install adm
.TP
Print client-side bcrypt generation instructions to share with a user:
.B tacctl hash commands
.SH NOTES
.B Unified tacctl config.
Every tacctl tunable \(em bcrypt cost, password / secret minimum lengths,
password-age warning threshold, default scope, mgmt-ACL permits + ACL names,
and per-group Cisco priv-exec mappings \(em is driven by two sources:
the canonical defaults embedded in
.I bin/tacctl.sh
(printed by
.BR "tacctl config defaults" )
and operator overrides in
.IR /etc/tacquito/tacctl.yaml .
Missing keys inherit from the defaults; setting a key back to the default
value removes it; an empty overrides file is pruned. Writes are
schema-validated (bad ranges, typo'd keys, malformed CIDRs rejected
before anything lands on disk).
.PP
.B IPv4 only by default.
The service runs with
.B -network tcp
which binds IPv4 only. Switching to
.B tcp6
enables a dual-stack socket on most platforms; IPv4 clients then
connect with IPv4-mapped addresses
.RB ( ::ffff:10.1.0.1 )
that do not match IPv4 prefix ACLs configured via
.BR "tacctl scope prefixes" ,
.BR "config allow" ,
or
.BR "config deny" .
Add equivalent IPv6 prefix rules before enabling
.B tcp6.
.PP
.B Juniper template users are required.
Every
.B local-user-name
referenced by a group class (for example
.BR RO-CLASS ,
.BR OP-CLASS ,
.BR RW-CLASS )
must have a matching local user on each Juniper device. Without this,
TACACS+ authentication succeeds but Junos rejects the login silently.
Run
.B tacctl config juniper
to regenerate the device-side configuration after adding or editing
groups.
.PP
.B Config edits.
.B tacctl
automatically restarts the service and creates a backup before every
change. Manual edits to
.I /etc/tacquito/tacquito.yaml
require
.B sudo systemctl restart tacquito
afterwards.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR systemctl (1),
.BR journalctl (1),
.BR visudo (8),
.BR tacquito (8)
.SH PROJECT
https://github.com/rett/tacctl
